# A Beginner's Guide to O Notation

## Motivation

How to answer questions like:
"Which of these algorithms is fastest?"
"Which of these algorithms uses less memory?"

## High Level Approach

In order to answer such questions sensibly we need an abstraction of computation, to analyze algorithms _independent_ of a given hardware.

## Abstraction of Hardware

What does it mean to abstract something?

In mathematics we abstract numbers from numbers of things

In computer science we abstract algorithms from "code running on my/your/their machine"

Turing Machines: the abstraction of hardware.

## Abstraction of Input Size

We are not interested in absolute numbers (they can be deceiving!)

We are interested in _the general shape of the function_.

How long does it take to find an element in an array?

How long does it take to find a matching pair in an array?

(Trick question: naive is n^2, but if you sort it first, it's only nlogn)

NB: input size is not the same as the size of a number. We are interested in 'size' as expressed by how many symbols it takes to represent. The size of a number is how many digits it is, although since this depends on the base number system we use, typically for convenience all numbers are treated as being the same size.

## Rules of Thumb

Rough guide: loops are `n`. Nested loops compound multiplicatively.

Array membership check is `n`. Set membership check is `1`.

Hashing and all datastructures built on top of hashes are magic.

"Divide and conquer" is usually `logn`

## No Silver Bullet

Caveats: Don't just switch everything to sets. Be realistic about how big `n` can get.

Sometimes minor optimizations of O-notation can be a net loss

Example: Bubblesort vs Mergesort. Bubblesort performs deceptively well for small `n`!

There's no value in thinking about `n` if `n` is a known fixed size.

## Remember the tradeoffs

Your code has two audiences:

- The machines that run it
- The people that maintain it
